# Fish Config Explained

## Example Fish Config Directory Structure

```plaintext
fish
├── completions/ - contains custom completion files for commands
├── conf.d/ - contains config files for fish loaded in alphanumeric order
├── config.fish - legacy fish config file
├── fish_variables - autogenerated file of variables set by fish
└── functions/ - contains functions that are autoloaded by fish (lazy loaded)
```

These configs are loaded in the following order:

1. `conf.d/`
2. `functions/`
3. `config.fish`
4. `fish_variables`
5. `completions/`

Unlike most shells that have a single monolithic config file, fish recommends splitting up the config into multiple files for better performance. However, for new users, it is easier to have a single config file, so fish does have a `config.fish` file that can contain all the configurations instead.

For advanced users or those who care about performance, don't use `config.fish` and instead use the `conf.d/` and `functions/` directories as described above.

All your config (environment variables, abbreviations, etc.) should be in `conf.d/`, and your functions should be in `functions/`, and fish will automatically load them as needed.

> [!NOTE]
> Don't use `alias` in your config, as that just creates a function in the background which is slow. Instead, use `abbr` where possible and use functions for more complex aliases. To convert aliases to functions, just add the `-s` flag to the alias. For example, `alias ls="ls -lah"` becomes `alias -s ls="ls -lah"`. Note: Only run this once, as this will write a function to the `functions/` directory. Now remove all traces of `alias` from your config. If you want to add an alias in the future, just run `alias -s <alias> <command>`. You can then edit and remove them from the `functions/` directory as needed.

`config.fish` should only exist if you need to override the above configs, as it is loaded after the `conf.d/` and `functions/` directories.

`fish_variables` is autogenerated and should not be manually edited. `completions/` is for custom completions; if you need them, you already know what to do.

The ideal fish config structure is to have all your configs in `conf.d/` and all your functions in `functions/` with no `config.fish` file.

Use this fish config as a reference for your own fish config.
